Abstract
Single-molecule methods have revolutionised the way that biological questions are tackled.
Contributions to the field of biophysics from biological nanopore-based methods are reviewed.
1. Introduction
Single-molecule methods have revolutionised the way that biological questions are tackled.[1, 2]
Single-molecule techniques can resolve the distribution and temporal order of events including
transient intermediates, pauses, multiple pathways, and even reverse steps that would otherwise be
obscured in ensemble studies. By observing one molecule at a time, the averaging of signals from an
ensemble of many molecules can be avoided to reveal the distribution and individual dynamics of
sub-populations. In the 15 years since nanopore detection first emerged the method has established
itself as a sensitive complementary technique for examining biological interactions at the singlemolecule
level. A wide range of analytes have been examined including; nucleic acids, peptides, and
polymers.[3, 4] The breadth of these applications is ever expanding, helped by the fact that biological
nanopores can be engineered using modern chemical and biological techniques to tune their suitability
to a particular application. For example, there continues to be much excitement surrounding the
application of nanopore-based methods for sequencing DNA on the single-molecule level.[5, 6]
Although recent advances in nanofabrication techniques have expanded the field to include man-made
solid-state nanopores,[7] this review will focus on the application of single-molecule methods that
exploit the nanometre dimensions of the α-haemolysin protein pore for studying the structure, activity
and interactions of biomolecules.
2. Background
2.1 The α-haemolysin nanopore
α-haemolysin (αHL) is toxin protein secreted by the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus as a 33.2 kDa
water-soluble monomer. αHL monomers spontaneously self-assemble in phospholipid bilayers to
form heptameric mushroom-shaped protein pores (Figure 1).[8] αHL displays its exotoxic activity by
binding to, and forming transmembrane channels in a wide range of mammalian cells including
erythrocytes, lymphocytes and endothelial cells.[9] The cap opening is approximately 26 Å in diameter
and leads into a larger inner vestibule. A 15 Å diameter constriction connects this vestibule to the β-
barrel transmembrane stem, which consists of 14 antiparallel strands and has an internal diameter of
22 Å.
Page 2 of 26
Figure 1. A) Side view of the α-haemolysin heptameric complex showing the approximate location of
the lipid bilayer (αHL, PDB ID: 7AHL).9 The complex is ∼100 Å in both height and diameter. B)
View of α-haemolysin from the cisentrance to the pore. C) and D) Cross-sectional and space-filling
models of α-haemolysin showing the internal diameter of the pore channel at different locations. Each
colour represents a different α-haemolysin monomer subunit.
2.2 The principle of single-molecule nanopore detection
αHL can serve as a detection element for examining single-molecules. In a typical experimental setup,
a thin insulating polymer sheet containing a small aperture (between 50-1000 m in diameter) is
sandwiched between two wells containing an electrolyte buffer.[10] A planar lipid bilayer membrane is
then formed in this aperture, either by ‘painting’ lipid over the aperture,[11] or by lowering and raising
a lipid monolayer floating on the surface of the buffer solution over the aperture opening.[12] Each
electrolyte chamber contains an electrode connected to a patch-clamp amplifier, a piece of equipment
that earned Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1991 for
their pioneering work in the field of electrophysiology.[13] [14] Since a lipid bilayer is electrically
insulting, no electrical current can flow between the two electrolyte chambers when a bilayer is
formed (a GΩ membrane resistance can be obtained routinely). A trace amount of αHL is then added
to either of the electrolyte chambers. Pore insertion into the suspended membrane is a stochastic event
and can take anything from a few seconds to several hours to occur, which often requires much
patience on the part of the researcher! In favourable circumstances, then a state where a single protein
channel is inserted in the membrane can be obtained as shown in the generic experimental set-up
shown in Figure 2. Under these conditions and upon the application of a transmembrane potential
difference (voltage), a stable measurable electrical current arises from the passage of ions through the
Page 3 of 26
channel pore (Figure 2A). Analyte molecules may modulate the ionic current flowing through the
protein channel. For example, a large molecule passing through the pore will reduce the magnitude of
the ionic current more than a smaller molecule. Thus, the current signature (Figure 2B) obtained from
a single-channel current recording can be used to identify single molecules from the distribution,
duration and ordering of events. Due to the random nature of events occurring on the single-molecule
level, the approach is sometimes referred to as ‘stochastic sensing’.[3],[16]
Figure 2. A platform for single-molecule experiments. Experimental setup with a single α-haemolysin
protein pore embedded in a suspended phospholipid bilayer. A) When a transmembrane voltage (V) is
applied across the bilayer, a stable current (I) arises from the passage of ions through the pore
channel. B) Transient ionic current blockades corresponding to the translocation of negatively charged
single-stranded oligonucleotides through the nanopore.16 The duration of the translocation (dwell
time), toff, and the inter-event duration, ton, are indicated. Since the average frequency of the current
blockades is proportional to the concentration of the analyte [c], the method gives direct access to the
rate constant of capture/association (kon=1/ton[c]), and the rate constant of translocation/dissociation,
(koff=1/toff).
3. Manipulation and recognition of nucleic acids using nanopores
Single oligonucleotide molecules have been examined using a wide range of methods such as atomic
force microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, and optical tweezers.[2] Distinct from other singlemolecule
methods, nanopore detectors facilitate the direct investigation of oligonucleotides without
Page 4 of 26
the need for chemical modifications, amplification, or attachment to a solid surface. Nonetheless,
chemical modification of the analytes and the use of engineered protein pores further broadens the
utility of the approach. Taken together, these approaches are able to provide insight into the sequence,
structural dynamics and thermodynamics of oligonucleotide primary, secondary and tertiary
structures.
3.1 Structure and hybridisation recognition in unmodified oligonucleotides
Kasianowicz and co-workers were the first to demonstrate that single-stranded RNA and DNA
molecules can be driven through a single αHL nanopore by the electric field created upon the
application of a transmembrane potential difference (voltage) (Figure 2B).[2, 15] The transient ion
current blockages resulting from the passage of oligonucleotides through the pore channel were used
to measure the length of oligonucleotides since the duration of passage of each molecule was
proportional to the length of the polymer. Using this pioneering methodology, Meller and co-workers
were able to calculate the speed of DNA translocation through the pore.[6] Polymers longer than the
length of the pore translocated at an average constant velocity, whilst the translocation speed of
shorter polymers increased with decreasing length. The speed of translocation increased non-linearly
as the transmembrane potential was increased.
In subsequent work, the approach was extended to investigate different DNA block co-polymers using
more advanced signal analyses.[16] The translocation of each polymer gave unique distributions of the
translocation duration and blockage currents, which could then be used to distinguish between
different 100-mer DNA block co-polymers in a mixed sample. The temperature dependence of the
event characteristics suggested that the distinguishing features of different oligonucleotides arose
from the secondary structures of the oligonucleotides studied.
As we have seen, the lumen of the wild-type αHL is wide enough to accommodate the translocation of
single-stranded oligonucleotides. Although dsDNA is too large to translocate the pore, it can be
trapped within the wide lumen on the cis-side of the pore (see vestibule in Figure 1C). This has been
exploited to inspect the unzipping kinetics of individual DNA hairpins under constant force and
constant loading rate (Figure 3).[17] By employing real-time dynamic voltage control, the applied
voltage pattern could be tuned to control the rate of DNA unzipping and subsequent translocation
through the pore. The unzipping times decreased exponentially with the voltage giving a characteristic
slope that was independent of the duplex region sequence. The magnitude of the voltage required to
achieve almost instantaneous unzipping upon DNA capture (Figure 3B→D) was found to depend
strongly on the stability of the duplex region. In an extension of this work, unzipping of dsDNA was
achieved under an applied transmembrane potential as before (Figure 4A→B). Polymerase chain
Page 5 of 26
reaction (PCR) analysis of the DNA content of the solution on both sides of the bilayer proved that
only one of the two DNA strands was pulled through the protein pore (Figure 4C). The ionic current
blockage of polynucleotide traversal revealed information about the time-scale of DNA unzipping
events. Furthermore, a simple kinetic model was used to estimate the unzipping enthalpy barriers and
the effective charge of the nucleotides within the pore lumen.
Figure 3. A) to B) Single-stranded DNA hairpin capture. C) to D) Application of an increased
transmembrane voltage causes the DNA to unzip and translocate through the pore.
Figure 4. A) to B) Capture of double-stranded DNA with a single-stranded overhang. C) to D)
Subsequent unzipping of DNA induced at higher transmembrane voltages. Only the longer ssDNA
strand was seen to translocate the pore upon unzipping.17–20
G-quadruplexes are tertiary DNA structures that form in guanine-rich nucleotide sequences identified
in numerous gene promoter sequences and within telomeric DNA. As such, they are potential drug
targets for cancer and other genetic diseases.[23] Gu and co-workers have explored the activity of
cations in regulating the folding and unfolding of the G-quadruplex formed by the thrombin-binding
aptamer (GGTTGGTGTGGTTGG) using the nanopore approach (Figure 5A).[21] The nanopore
current signature showed that G-quadruplex formation is cation-selective, and the order of the ability
of ions to stabilise G-quadruplex was found to be K+>NH4
+ ~ Ba2+>Cs ~ Na+ >Li+. G-quadruplex was
not detected in the presence of Mg2+ and Ca2+.
Page 6 of 26
Figure 5. A) DNA G-quadruplex capture, unfolding and channel translocation under a driving
potential.22 B) Ion current signals can be used to identify Watson–Crick base pairs, mismatches and
unnatural base pairs at the termini of single, blunt DNA hairpin molecules captured within a
nanopore.18, 19, 23
3.2 Sequence recognition in unmodified oligonucleotides
There has been an increasing focus on DNA sequencing by single-molecule methods since the
completion of the Human Genome Project. Advances in sequencing techniques are expected to help to
achieve large-scale, systematic sequencing of cancer genomes, unravel the genetic basis of disease
and guide the development of personalised healthcare.[24] To achieve this grand aim, time- and costefficient
sequencing methods are required. Nanopore-based methods offer some promise in this regard
because the restricted size of a nanopore channel ensures that the native order of the nucleotides is
retained as a strand of DNA threads through the nanopore. It was proposed that kilobase-length
single-stranded genomic DNA could be threaded through the pore, and its sequence revealed by the
ionic current signals without the need for fluorescent labels or amplification.[5]
Early investigations of oligonucleotide recognition using αHL found that polycytidylic (polyC),
polyadenylic acid (polyA), and polyuridylic acid (polyU) RNA homopolymers could be characterised
using ion current amplitudes and dwell times.[25] In addition, the approach could distinguish between
polyC and the polyA segments within a single RNA molecule. When A50 and C50 passed through the
nanopore, different current levels were observed. Similarly, when RNA block co-polymers A25C50,
C50A25, A25C50 and C50A25 passed through the nanopore, two distinct current levels were observed
within each translocation event that corresponded to the A and C regions in each molecule.[26] It was
also possible to identify the orientation of oligonucleotides as they translocate through a single αHL
pore (3’-leading vs. 5’-leading). 3’→5’ translocation of polyC RNA through αHL resulted in a
significantly higher current blockage compared with 5’→3’ translocation, and threading was preferred
from the 3’-end compared to the 5’-end. Similarly, when capturing ssDNA hairpins (Figure 4A to
4B), the residual current (IDNA/Ifree channel) for 3’→5’ ssDNA threading from the cis-side was lower
Page 7 of 26
compared with 5’→3’ threading (9% vs. 12% respectively).[27] Voltage-driven 3’→5’ capture from
the cis-side of the pore was also faster than 5’→3’ capture. Interestingly, escape from the pore under
zero applied potential was slower for 5’→3’ unthreading than in the opposite direction (Figure 4B to
4A). Molecular dynamics simulations suggested that base tilting during threading may have been the
origin of this difference.
Ghadiri and co-workers have pushed oligonucleotide recognition using unmodified αHL to its limits
by demonstrating recognition of a single base in an ssDNA molecule. This was achieved by capturing
DNA hairpins on the cis-side of an αHL pore under an applied electric field (Figure 3B). Initially,
DNA hairpins with different polyA or polyC segments were discriminated using ion currents. After
extensive optimisation of the hairpin designs, it was found that a single adenosine base could be
distinguished from cytosine at a specific position within a region of polyC ssDNA.[28] To date, this
study still represents the closest that anyone has come to reading the sequence of unmodified ssDNA
using wild-type αHL ion current recordings.
Discrimination among individual Watson-Crick base pairs at the termini of single DNA and RNA
hairpin molecules has also been investigated using single nanopores (Figure 5B). Hundreds of hairpin
molecules could be examined, classified and quantified in a few minutes, and revealed that it was
possible to resolve single-nucleotide and single-base pair differences between otherwise identical
DNA hairpin molecules.[22] Computational pattern analysis of ion current recordings enabled each of
the different combinations of Watson-Crick base pairs and their orientation to be identified.[18, 19] The
work was extended to examine the behaviour of terminal base pairs upon substitution of thymine for
the unnatural base fluorotoluene. Kinetic analysis suggested that the characteristic signals caused by
each of the different combinations of base-pairs were dependent on the stability of the terminal base
pair and its nearest neighbour.
Clearly, there have been many impressive examples of direct recognition of unmodified
oligonucleotides. However, a practical nanopore-based method for sequencing unmodified DNA
using αHL remains elusive. Two barriers to this aim are the rapid translocation speed of unmodified
oligonucleotides and the fundamental limitations of ion current recognition. This has motivated
researchers to explore alternative avenues of nanopore research, particularly those that exploit
modified oligonucleotides and engineered nanopores.
3.3 Exploitation and recognition of modified oligonucleotides
Advances in automated synthesis, chemical, and biochemical methods provide access to a plethora of
oligonucleotide modifications with an extensive range of applications that span the physical,
Page 8 of 26
biological and medical sciences.[29] Such modified oligonucleotides have provided new opportunities
for expanding the capabilities of αHL sensing technologies.
One frequently employed oligonucleotide modification is biotinylation. Single biotinylated
oligonucleotides can be captured within a nanopore when capped with avidin/streptavidin proteins
(Figure 6A to 5B). These proteins are too large to translocate the pore and thus serve as ‘stopper’ and
allowing the read-time of current recordings to be increased. PolyA, polyC and polyT ssDNA copolymers
captured in this way could be distinguished from each other due to their distinct ion
currents.[8] As in earlier studies, ion current blockages were found to be orientation dependent, giving
different currents when threaded from the 3’- or the 5’-direction. The different homopolymers could
be distinguished most easily when threaded from the 5’-end. In a recent tour de force study, Bayley
and co-workers systematically scanned the recognition of streptavidin-capped ssDNA strands
captured within wild-type and mutant αHL pores.[31]
Figure 6. A nanosensor for sequence-specific detection of an ssDNA analyte across a bilayer. A)→B)
A biotinylated DNA probe with a terminal avidin anchor is captured within a nanopore under an
applied transmembrane potential. The 3′-end of the DNA probe is exposed on the trans side of the
pore. B)→C) When the analyte DNA is present, it can specifically bind to the protruding
complementary single-stranded DNA probe to furnish a fully interlocked αHL⋅DNA rotaxane
complex. C)→D) The position of the threaded strand can be flipped back and forth by changing the
sign of the applied potential. D)→A) Higher potentials force the analyte DNA to dissociate from the
probe DNA and free the pore.30
Page 9 of 26
Independent studies arising from both the Marziali and the Ghadiri laboratories took advantage of this
‘stoppering’ approach to form DNA ‘rotaxanes’ of transmembrane pores (Figures 5 to 7).[30, 32] A
rotaxane is a mechanically-interlocked molecular architecture formed when one molecule is threaded
through the centre of another ring-shaped molecule. In this case, the thread is the ssDNA, the ring is
the αHL protein pore, and the stoppers are avidin/streptavidin and dsDNA.[33] Trapping the threaded
DNA in this manner facilitates multiple ion current readings of the same DNA molecule.
Marziali used such a device to study the relationship between duplex dissociation time and DNA
hybridisation energy at the single-molecule level.[30] The ssDNA probe contained a specific
recognition sequence at the 3’-end, and a biotin modification at the 5’-end bound to an avidin stopper.
By applying a transmembrane potential, the ssDNA conjugate was threaded through the pore,
exposing the 3’-end of the DNA probe on the opposite side of the membrane (Figure 6A to 5B). When
captured in this way, the probe sequence was free to bind a complementary oligonucleotide sequence
and form a rotaxane complex (Figure 6C).[34] Reversal of the applied potential made the DNA probe
withdraw from the pore (Figure 6D), and under a high enough potential, this force caused the analyte
DNA sequence to dissociate from the DNA probe (Figure 6D to 5A). The time required for DNA
unzipping could be used to identify different oligonucleotides and single-base mismatches.
In Ghadiri’s variation of the rotaxane approach (Figure 7), DNA-PEG co-polymers were trapped
within the pore using a streptavidin stopper on one side of the membrane and a dsDNA stopper on the
other. As before, the position of the DNA-PEG co-polymer could be flipped back and forth by
changing the sign of the transmembrane potential, but this time, different ionic currents were recorded
depending upon whether the DNA or the PEG segments of the co-polymer were occupying the pore
channel. The smaller cross-section of PEG means that it blocks the ionic current flowing through the
pore less than an oligonucleotide (Figure 7).[32]
Page 10 of 26
Figure 7. DNA–PEG co-polymer rotaxanes assembled with dsDNA and biotin–streptavidin stoppers.
Distinct current–voltage (I–V) traces were obtained depending on the direction of threading through
the pore.32
This simple recognition between PEG and DNA was extended in later work by carefully tuning the
length of the DNA and PEG regions such that the small changes in the proportion of DNA to PEG
would result in a change in the ionic current flowing through the pore (Figure 8).[35] The approach was
sufficiently sensitive to allow the length of the double-stranded DNA region to be measured with
single-base precision over a 10-base reading window. Further analysis of the signal-to-noise ratios
revealed an maximum spatial resolution of 1.4 Å. Later, this supramolecular device was used to
monitor DNA polymerase-catalysed nucleotide extension with unprecedented single-base resolution
at the single-molecule level (see Figure 15).
Page 11 of 26
Figure 8. Supramolecular nanopore-based device that can measure the length of a single molecule of
DNA with ångström-scale resolution. Variation of the length of the dsDNA duplex region (+0 to +8
bases) changes the proportion of DNA to PEG threaded through the β-barrel of the αHL pore. The
differences in the length of the coloured DNA molecule manifest themselves in the characteristic
current–voltage (I–V) trace of each complex. The largest and most reproducible current difference
between the four complexes was obtained at +40 mV (vertical grey dotted line).35
Recently, Howorka and Mitchell chemically modified ssDNA with a peptide tag. This increased the
cross-sectional diameter of the DNA, and was found to slow down the speed of translocation through
the pore (Figure 9A). The current signatures of peptide-tagged DNA depended on the length, charge
and size of the tag. This facilitated the identification of up to two different bases during the
translocation of a single strand of DNA.[36]
Page 12 of 26
Figure 9. A) Translocation of an ssDNA molecule tagged with a peptide.36 B) Modified αHL pore
with an ssDNA sequence attached to a mutant cysteine residue.37, 38
3.4 Recognition of mononucleotides using engineered nanopores
One of the major advantages of biological nanopores such as αHL, is that the protein sequence can be
readily engineered using molecular biology and subsequently chemically modified.[39, 40]. For
example, a short ssDNA was tethered to the genetically modified heteroheptameric αHL pore to form
a ‘DNA-nanopore’ biosensor (Figure 9B). The DNA-nanopore was able to distinguish between
complementary individual DNA strands of up to 30 nucleotides in length that only differed by a single
base.[37, 38]
Bayley and co-workers have also pioneered the use of so-called ‘molecular adapters’ such as
cyclodextrin to enhance the recognition properties of αHL (Figures 10 and 11).[39] This approach
allows analytes that would normally be too small to be recognised by wild-type αHL to be detected
upon binding to the molecular adaptor lodged within the αHL channel. Recently, αHL mutants have
been engineered to enhance the stability of the adapter•αHL complex. By using a mutant (M113R)7
nanopore equipped with a heptakis-(6-deoxy-6-amino)-β-cyclodextrin adapter it was possible to
distinguish between each of the four different ribonucleosides and 2’-deoxyribonucleoside
5’-monophosphates (rNMPs and dNMPs).[40] NMPs could only be identified when the cyclodextrin
adapter was bound in the pore. However despite the use of mutant pores, the adapter was only
transiently bound within the pore (Figure 10B). This limitation was overcome by engineering a
nanopore with a covalently attached cyclodextrin adapter to achieve a continual read-out at a high
data acquisition rate (Figure 11).[41] The sensor was capable of detecting deoxynucleotide
5’-monophosphate molecules with an accuracy of 99.8%, and was even able to discriminate
methylated cytosine 5’-monophosphates from the standard DNA bases.
Page 13 of 26
Figure 10. Single-channel ionic current recordings showing nucleotide monophosphate recognition
with a cyclodextrin nanopore adapter. A) Free channel (open pore). B) αHL nanopore with a
noncovalently bound cyclodextrin adaptor. C) Subsequent binding and recognition of a nucleotide
monophosphate.39
Figure 11. A) Gaussian fits of current histograms corresponding to dGMP, dTMP, dAMP and dCMP
recognition by an engineered nanopore with a covalently attached cyclodextrin adapter.40 B) Singlechannel
recording from the permanent adapter nanopore displaying real-time recognition of discrete
dGMP, dTMP, dAMP and dCMP current levels.
It has been proposed that this approach could be developed as a novel method of DNA sequencing if
used in combination with an exonuclease that processively cleaves mononucleotides one-by-one from
the end of an ssDNA chain. In a step towards this aim, it was shown that highly accurate dNMP
recognition was maintained under experimental conditions compatible with the exonuclease EcoExo
I. At high potential (+180 mV) the dNMPs passed directly through the pore after being read, meaning
Page 14 of 26
that erroneous duplicated reads of the same dNMP molecule can be avoided. Nevertheless, several
other problems must be solved before this approach can be adopted as a viable technique for DNA
sequencing. Above all, each dNMP molecule must enter the nanopore in the same sequence that they
are cleaved by the exonuclease.
4. Investigation of peptides and proteins using nanopores
The structure and function of peptides and proteins are intimately related, and only certain
conformations may exert biological activity. In this section, nanopore approaches for investigating the
structure, interactions, and activity of peptides, proteins and nucleic acid-manipulating enzymes will
be described.
4.1 Probing the structures of peptides and proteins
The nanopore approach can be used as a tool to gain insight into the structure of peptides. Lee, Kraatz
and co-workers synthesised peptides containing one, two, or three, repeats of the collagen-like
sequence (Gly-Pro-Pro)n bearing positively charged ferrocene units at each end.[42] Circular dichroism
(CD) spectra suggested that the peptide forms a triple helix when n = 3, a double-helix when n = 2,
and has no dominant secondary or tertiary structure when n = 1. When these charged peptides were
driven through the nanopore (Figure 12A), each peptide generated a unique blockage current vs.
translocation duration fingerprint. The triple helix gave the largest current blockage and dwell times,
while the double helix and the monomer gave rise to smaller current blockages and shorter dwell
times. Importantly, the nanopore analysis revealed the presence of intermediate conformations that
could not be detected using bulk spectroscopic techniques, such as CD or NMR, highlighting one of
the major advantages of single-molecule methods.
Figure 12. Structural analysis of A) simple peptides,42–44 B) zinc fingers45and C) protein folding by
using nanopores.46
Page 15 of 26
Taking this one step further, the nanopore technique can also be used to study the folding and
unfolding of proteins and peptides at single-molecule level. Lee and co-workers used the nanopore
method to examine folding in Zif168, a zinc finger containing 28 amino acids (Figure 12B). In the
folded state, Zif168 contains β-sheet, α-helix, and turn motifs, and is too large to enter the lumen of
αHL. Meanwhile, in the absence of Zn2+ ions the peptide is unfolded and is able to translocate the
pore.
Current signature analysis in the absence of Zn2+ revealed two different populations, which were
attributed either bumping (with small ion current blockages and long dwell times) or translocation
events (with large ion current blockages and short dwell times).[45] Upon addition of an equimolar
concentration of Zn2+, the ratio of translocation events to bumping events decreased. Further work
examined the unfolding of an 86-residue protein as it translocated the αHL nanopore, establishing the
generality of the approach for studying the conformations of peptides and small proteins.[47]
Remarkably, it was found that a single mutation to the 86-residue protein was sufficient to
dramatically change the blockage event profiles, demonstrating the sensitivity of this nanotechnology
to structural changes in biomolecules. In the ultimate extension of this work, Pelta and co-workers
examined the guanidinium-induced unfolding of the 370-residue (40 kDa) maltose binding protein
(MBP) (Figure 12C).[46] In absence of the guanidinium, the native MBP protein could not enter the
αHL pore, and no blockage events were observed. However, many current blockages emerged after
the addition of 1.35 M guanidinium hydrochloride. The ion current traces revealed partially folded
conformations, as evidenced by longer duration blockages at lower concentrations of guanidinium
hydrochloride.
4.2 Studying protein-binding interactions
In addition to probing the underlying biophysics of nanopore translocation, αHL has served as a
convenient model for studying the interactions of proteins and peptides with membrane-spanning β-
barrels. Furthermore, modified αHL pores featuring specific binding sites have enabled to the
investigation of specific protein binding interactions.
Lee, Kraatz and co-workers synthesised a collection of negatively charged α-helical peptides and
characterised their translocation through both αHL (Figure 12A).[43] The ratio of bumping to
translocation events was related to the charge and dipole moment of the peptide in addition to the
applied transmembrane potential. It was suggested that larger dipoles and electric fields facilitate the
alignment of the peptide with the pore channel. Weaker fields and peptides with neutral charge or
low-dipole moments were less likely to align with the pore channel, increasing the likelihood of
bumping events. Furthermore, threading from the cis-side of the pore was favoured over threading
Page 16 of 26
from the trans-side, suggesting that the vestibule helps to align and funnel the peptides through the
channel. For translocation events, both the ion current blockage and the blockage duration increased
with the length of the peptides.[43] These results mirrored the work of Movileanu and co-workers, who
found similar results for the translocation of cationic peptides through αHL channels.[44]
It has been suggested that the hydrophilic interior of the αHL pore provides an energetic barrier to the
translocation of hydrophobic peptides. Extending this reasoning, it was proposed that engineering
negatively charged aspartic acid residues into the αHL β-barrel would reduce the energetic barrier to
the transmembrane translocation of positively charged peptides.[52] Indeed, it was found that the
incorporation of two rings of acidic residues at both the entrance and the exit of the β-barrel increased
the rates of peptide association and dissociation. Movileanu and co-workers later exploited the same
negatively charged αHL mutants to assemble a protein-protein complex between the αHL nanopore
and the 110-amino acid protein barnase.[48] By fusing positively charged peptide fragments to the Nterminus
of the barnase sequence, the protein could be trapped electrostatically within the lumen of
the negatively charged αHL pore (Figure 13A). A series of mutations to the proteins facilitated a
systematic investigation of protein-protein interactions at the single-molecule level.
Figure 13. Nanopore-based single-molecule studies of protein interactions. A) Engineered α-
haemolysin nanopore and pb2-barnase protein.49 B) Reversible binding of a mutant streptavidin to the
biotin probe can be detected by using ion current recordings.50 The PEG linker is terminated with a
biotin group and covalently tethered to a mutant cysteine residue within the α-haemolysin pore. C)
Nanopore modified with a protein kinase inhibitor peptide for the detection of kinase binding.51, 52
Page 17 of 26
Researchers have developed a number of different nanopore-based approaches for detecting protein
binding. For example, the biotin-terminated oligonucleotides discussed earlier have been exploited in
the detection of avidin/streptavidin binding (Figure 6A to 6B).[2] In the absence of streptavidin, a
ssDNA probe may freely translocate through the pore causing short-lived current blockades.
However, in the presence of streptavidin long current blockades were observed. The concentration of
these biotin-binding proteins could be measured because the ratio of short-lived to long-lived
blockades is proportional to the concentration of streptavidin when excess biotinylated DNA was
present. Bayley and co-workers have engineered nanopore detectors for streptavidin by covalently
attaching a biotinylated polyethylene glycol (PEG) chain inside the lumen of the αHL pore (Figure
13B).[49] The device was able to detect the reversible binding of single molecules of a mutant
streptavidin on either side of the bilayer since the flexible 3.4 kDa polymer was free to traverse both
sides of the bilayer. Binding events were detected as the decrease in the ion current passing through
the pore on the sub-millisecond timescale.
Extending these studies, Bayley and co-workers employed two different strategies to assemble a
detector for a specific protein kinase enzyme. In the first study, a short PEG linker was used to attach
a peptide inhibitor to the trans-entrance of the αHL pore, and in a follow-on study the same peptide
inhibitor was genetically encoded within the sequence of one of the αHL monomers (Figure 13C).[50,
51] When the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase was bound to the inhibitor peptide
attached to the αHL pore, a partial blockage of the ion current was observed, allowing the detection of
binding events at the single-molecule level. The kinetic and thermodynamic parameters for the
binding events were determined and compared well with ensemble measurements.
4.3 Examining nucleic acid-manipulating proteins
Nucleic acid-binding and manipulating proteins are exciting subjects within the field biophysics due
to their essential roles in the maintenance and regulation of the genome. Nanopore-based approaches
are able to complement existing single-molecule methods to reveal new information about the
interactions and mechanisms of these intriguing proteins.
Kasianowicz and co-workers examined the binding of bromodeoxyuridine polyclonal antibody to
ssDNA terminated with a single bromodeoxyuridine base using αHL (Figure 14A).[2] Upon addition
of the antibody, long current blockades were observed due to capture of the DNA•antibody complex
in the nanopore.
Page 18 of 26
Figure 14. Nanopore detection of DNA–protein interactions. A) Binding of bromodeoxyuridine
antibody to bromodeoxyuridine DNA in nanopore experiments.2 B) Study of ssDNA–exonuclease I
complexes.53 C) Detection of viral RNA translocation enzyme ATPase P4 by using an α-haemolysin
detector.54
Recently, Akeson and co-workers used nanopore detection to study the interaction of ssDNA with
exonuclease I (exo I) (Figure 14B).[53] The blockage current vs. dwell time signatures contained two
clusters of events, one corresponded to free ssDNA, and the other to the ssDNA•exo I complexes. The
rate of ssDNA translocation was reduced when the enzyme was bound to the ssDNA. Furthermore,
single ssDNA•exo I complexes could be pulled apart by increasing the magnitude of the applied
electric field. In this way, the ion current traces could be used to probe the dissociation rate of the
complexes in a similar manner to earlier nanopore-based investigations of DNA unzipping (Figures 3
and 6).
ATPase P4 is a viral RNA packaging motor protein from bacteriophage ɸ8 that couples ATP
hydrolysis to movement along RNA and has also been studied using αHL. More specifically,
researchers used a nanopore detector to examine the reversible association of RNA•P4 enzyme
complexes at single-molecule level (Figure 14C).[54] The oligoribonucleotide 5’-C25A25-3’ was
recorded during its passage through αHL, giving rise to current blockades with an average duration of
0.5 ms. After the addition of ATPase P4 much longer translocation events of between 10-1000 ms
were observed, which were attributed to capture of enzyme-RNA complexes. The addition of ATP
resulted in the disappearance of these long-duration events, suggesting the rapid dissociation of the
RNA•enzyme complexes. The frequency of events was also dependent on the P4 enzyme
concentration and the oligoribonucleotide length, which was consistent with the mechanism of ATPdependent
RNA translocation. The rate of dissociation of the RNA•enzyme complexes was found to
be dependent upon the force generated by the externally applied electric field, facilitating the study of
the complexes under non-equilibrium conditions.
Page 19 of 26
DNA polymerases are fascinating enzymes that have an essential role in the replication and
propagation of genetic information. A series of papers by Akeson, Lieberman and co-workers used
nanopore detection to study the substrate binding dynamics of the Klenow Fragment from E. coli
DNA polymerase I (Figure 15).[55-57] DNA hairpins terminated at their 3’-ends with
dideoxynucleotides were captured under an applied potential in the nanopore. DNA polymerase
enzymes were able to bind to these hairpins but the 3’-dideoxy-modification prevented the DNA
polymerase from extending the DNA by incorporating deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs). Thus,
ion current signatures and dwell times could be used to distinguish between the unbound hairpin
(Figure 15A), the binary DNA•polymerase complex (Figure 15B), and the ternary
DNA•polymerase•dNTP complexes (Figure 15C). Most strikingly of all, it was possible to identify
whether a correctly templated, or a mismatched dNTP molecule was bound within the catalytic site of
the individually captured DNA•polymerase complexes. Further insights into the mechanism of dNTP
recognition by the DNA polymerase were gained when it was found that the dwell times of the ternary
DNA•polymerase•dNTP complexes depended heavily on the presence of Mg2+ ions.[55] Later, realtime
partitioning of dNTPs into and out of captured DNA•polymerase complexes was reported.[56]
Adoption of a DNA rotaxane approach (similar to that shown in Figure 6) combined with precise,
high-speed voltage control has also allowed rapid interrogation of DNA•polymerase complexes.[57]
Figure 15. DNA polymerase–DNA binding and deoxynucleotide triphosphate dependence have been
investigated by using nanopores.55–57
In section 3.3 we introduced a supramolecular nanopore-rotaxane complex developed by Ghadiri and
co-workers with the ability to measure the length of single molecule of DNA with single-base
precision (Figure 8).[35] This device was configured such that the dsDNA region served as a primertemplate
complex containing a 3-OH’ group onto which the templated addition of nucleotides could
be catalysed by DNA polymerase. The device was then cycled between a ‘monitoring mode’, in
which the length of the DNA primer molecule was measured with single-base accuracy, and an
Page 20 of 26
‘extension mode’ in which the dsDNA primer template complex was fully exposed to activity of the
enzyme.
Incorporation of a single base increased the ratio of DNA to PEG threaded through the channel
resulting in stepwise increases in the ion current flowing through the channel (Figure 16). By using
this method it was possible to resolve nine consecutive single-nucleotide primer extension steps and it
is believed to be the first single-molecule method to resolve DNA polymerase activity with singlebase
precision.[35]
Figure 16. Monitoring DNA polymerase-catalysed extension of a single DNA primer molecule with
single-nucleotide resolution by using a nanopore-based device.35 A) The double-stranded DNA region
and the streptavidin cap serve as stoppers trapping the threaded DNA–PEG copolymer in place. B)
DNA primer extension by DNA polymerase in the elongation mode results in the section of the
ssDNA that was blocking the pore being replaced by an equal length of PEG polymer. This process
can be monitored by using ion current recordings in the primer length monitoring mode (A). C)
Because the PEG polymer blocks the ion current flowing through the pore less than the DNA, the
base-by-base extension of a single molecule of DNA by DNA polymerase can be monitored from the
corresponding stepped increases in the current.
5. Summary & Outlook
From its origins in the field of electrophysiology, the development of nanopore-based methods was
initially spurred on by the prospect of sequencing single DNA molecules using α-haemolysin. The
Page 21 of 26
construction of nanopore-based devices that have been engineered to a particular task has enabled
researchers to innovate and broadened their horizons in to the wider field of biophysics, where there
has been an abundance of achievements. The structure and interactions of oligonucleotides, peptides
and proteins have been probed extensively. Whilst some of the most exciting developments have
provided insights into the function and dynamics of complicated biological processes at the singlemolecule
level. Continued advances in nanopore-based techniques will continue to provide valuable
contributions to biophysics, and the emerging fields of nanobiotechnology and synthetic biology.
Page 22 of 26
References
[1] A. N. Kapanidis, T. Strick, Trends Biochem. Sci. 2009, 34, 234-243.
[2] J J. J. Kasianowicz, S. E. Henrickson, H. H. Weetall, B. Robertson, Anal. Chem.2001, 73, 2268-
2272.
[3] H. Bayley, P. S. Cremer, Nature 2001, 413, 226-230.
[4] H. Bayley, O. Braha, L.-Q. Gu, Adv. Mat. 2000, 12, 139-142.
[5] D. Branton, D. W. Deamer, A. Marziali, H. Bayley, S. A. Benner, T. Butler, M. Di Ventra, S.
Garaj, A. Hibbs, X. Huang, S. B. Jovanovich, P. S. Krstic, S. Lindsay, X. S. Ling, C. H.
Mastrangelo, A. Meller, J. S. Oliver, Y. V. Pershin, J. M. Ramsey, R. Riehn, G. V. Soni, V.
Tabard-Cossa, M. Wanunu, M. Wiggin, J. A. Schloss, Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1146-1153.
[6] A. Meller, L. Nivon, D. Branton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 86, 3435-3438.
[7] C. Dekker, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 209-215.
[8] R. F. Purnell, K. K. Mehta, J. J. Schmidt, Nano Letters 2008, 8, 3029-3034.
[9] L. Song, M. R. Hobaugh, C. Shustak, S. Cheley, H. Bayley, J. E. Gouaux, Science 1996, 274,
1859-1886.
[10] J. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. 2005, 15, 831-840.
[11] P. Mueller, D. O. Rudin, H. T. Tien, W. C. Wescott, Nature 1962, 194, 979-980.
[12] M. Montal, P. Mueller, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1972, 69, 3561-3556.
[13] E. Neher, B. Sakmann, J. H. Steinbach, Pfluegers Archiv. 1978, 375, 219-228.
[14] D. J. A. Wyllie, Neuromethods 2002, 35, 69-109.
[15] J. J. Kasianowicz, E. Brandin, D. Branton, D. Deamer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1996, 93,
13770-13773.
[16] A. Meller, L. Nivon, E. Brandin, J. Golovchenko, D. Branton, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.U. S. A.
2000, 97, 1079-1084.
[17] J. Mathe, H. Visram, V. Viasnoff, Y. Rabin, A. Meller, Biophys. J. 2004, 87, 3205-3212.
Page 23 of 26
[18] S. Winters-Hilt, W. Vercoutere, V. S. DeGuzman, D. Deamer, M. Akeson, D. Haussler, Biophys.
J. 2003, 84, 967-976.
[19] W. A. Vercoutere, S. Winters-Hilt, V. S. DeGuzman, D. Deamer, S. E. Ridino, J. T. Rodgers, H.
E. Olsen, A. Marziali, M. Akeson, Nucleic Acids Res. 2003, 31, 1311-1318.
[20] A. F. Sauer-Budge, J. A. Nyamwanda, D. K. Lubensky, D. Branton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90,
238101/238101-238101/238104.
[21] J. W. Shim, Q. Tan, L.-Q. Gu, Nucleic Acids Res. 2009, 37, 972-982.
[22] W. Vercoutere, S. Winters-Hilt, H. Olsen, D. Deamer, D. Haussler, M. Akeson, Nat. Biotechnol.
2001, 19, 681.
[23] S. Neeidle, S. Balasubramanian, Quadruplex Nucleic Acids, Royal Society of Chemistry,
Cambridge (2006).
[24] M. R. Stratton, P. J. Campbell, P. A. Futreal, Nature 2009, 458, 719-724.
[25] M. Akeson, D. Branton, J. J. Kasianowicz, E. Brandin, D. W. Deamer, Biophys. J. 1999, 77,
3227-3233.
[26] T. Z. Butler, J. H. Gundlach, M. A. Troll, Biophys. J. 2006, 90, 190-199.
[27] J. Mathe, A. Aksimentiev, D. R. Nelson, K. Schulten, A. Meller, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2005, 102, 12377-12382.
[28] N. Ashkenasy, J. Sanchez-Quesada, H. Bayley, M. R. Ghadiri, Angew. Chem. 2005, 117, 1425–
1428; Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2005, 44, 1401-1404.
[29] A. Somoza, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008, 37, 2668-2675.
[30] J. Nakane, M. Wiggin, A. Marziali, Biophys. J. 2004, 87, 3618.
[31] D. Stoddart, A. J. Heron, E. Mikhailova, G. Maglia, H. Bayley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2009, 106, 7702-7007.
[32] J. Sanchez-Quesada, A. Saghatelian, S. Cheley, H. Bayley, M. R. Ghadiri, Angew. Chem. 2004,
116, 3125–3129; Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2004, 43, 3063-3067.
[33] D. B. Amabilino, J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Rev. 1995, 95, 2725-2829.
Page 24 of 26
[34] E. R. Kay, D. A. Leigh, F. Zerbetto, Angew. Chem. 2006, 119, 72–196; Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
2007, 46, 72-191.
[35] S. L. Cockroft, J. Chu, M. Amorin, M. R. Ghadiri, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 818-820.
[36] N. Mitchell, S. Howorka, Angew. Chem. 2008, 120, 5647–5650; Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2008, 47,
5565-5568.
[37] S. Howorka, S. Cheley, H. Bayley, Nat. Biotechnol. 2001, 19, 636-639
[38] S. Howorka, L. Movileanu, O. Braha, H. Bayley, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2001, 98, 12996-
13001.
[39] L. Q. Gu, O. Braha, S. Conlan, S. Cheley, H. Bayley, Nature 1999, 398, 686-690.
[40] Y. Astier, O. Braha, H. Bayley, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 1705-1710.
[41] J. Clarke, H.-C. Wu, L. Jayasinghe, A. Patel, S. Reid, H. Bayley, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2009, 4, 265-
270.
[42] T. C. Sutherland, Y.-T. Long, R.-I. Stefureac, I. Bediako-Amoa, H.-B. Kraatz, J. S. Lee, Nano
Lett. 2004, 4, 1273-1277.
[43] R. Stefureac, Y.-T. Long, H.-B. Kraatz, P. Howard, J. S. Lee, Biochem. 2006, 45, 9172-9179.
[44] L. Movileanu, J. P. Schmittschmitt, J. M. Scholtz, H. Bayley, Biophys. J. 2005, 89, 1030-1045.
[45] R. I. Stefureac, J. S. Lee, Small 2008, 4, 1646-1650.
[46] G. Oukhaled, J. Mathe, A. L. Biance, L. Bacri, J. M. Betton, D. Lairez, J. Pelta, L. Auvray, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 158101.
[47] R. Stefureac, L. Waldner, P. Howard, J. S. Lee, Small 2008, 4, 59-63.
[48] M. M. Mohammad, S. Prakash, A. Matouschek, L. Movileanu, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130,
4081-4088.
[49] L. Movileanu, S. Howorka, O. Braha, H. Bayley, Nat. Biotechnol. 2000, 18, 1091-1095.
[50] H. Xie, O. Braha, L.-Q. Gu, S. Cheley, H. Bayley, Chem. Biol. 2005, 12, 109-120.
[51] S. Cheley, H. Xie, H. Bayley, ChemBioChem 2006, 7, 1923-1927.
Page 25 of 26
[52] A. J. Wolfe, M. M. Mohammad, S. Cheley, H. Bayley, L. Movileanu, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007,
129, 14034-14041.
[53] B. Hornblower, A. Coombs, R. D. Whitaker, A. Kolomeisky, S. J. Picone, A. Meller, M. Akeson,
Nat. Methods 2007, 4, 315-317.
[54] Y. Astier, D. E. Kainov, H. Bayley, R. Tuma, S. Howorka, ChemPhysChem 2007, 8, 2189-2194.
[55] S. Benner, R. J. A. Chen, N. A. Wilson, R. Abu-Shumays, N. Hurt, K. R. Lieberman, D. W.
Deamer, W. B. Dunbar, M. Akeson, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 718-724.
[56] N. Hurt, H. Wang, M. Akeson, K. R. Lieberman, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 3772-3778.
[57] N. A. Wilson, R. Abu-Shumays, B. Gyarfas, H. Wang, K. R. Lieberman, M. Akeson, W. B.
Dunbar, ACS Nano 2009, 3, 995-1003.
